# Species traits and evironmental context determine how a non-native facilitator affects an invaded community

## Abstract

Invasive species are often studied for the disproportionately strong negative effects they have in their introduced range compared to their native range and the mechanisms causing these effects. Less attention has been paid to whether invasive species, particularly those that are important as facilitators in their native range, have persistent positive effects in their invaded range. In this study, we manipulated the density of the high intertidal acorn barnacle Balanus glandula in its native (Bluestone Point, British Columbia, Canada) and invaded range (Punta Ameghino, Chubut Province, Argentina) in combination with herbivore density to determine how this facilitator differentially affects associated species at these two sites. Given that high intertidal species at Punta Ameghino (PA) are evolutionarily naïve to barnacles, we expected the positive effects of B. glandula at Bluestone Point (BP) to be weakened or absent at PA. Balanus glandula had a positive association with perennial algal cover at BP, but a negative association with perennial algal cover at PA. Ephemeral algal cover at BP was negatively associated with barnacle cover, but the same association was positive at PA. Herbivore abundance, meanwhile, was positively correlated with barnacle cover in both systems, and the strength of this interaction was similar in both the native and invaded range. These results suggest that shared evolutionary history is not a prerequisite for species to benefit from a novel facilitator, and further reinforce the importance of the traits of associated species and environmental stress in governing the strength of facilitative interactions.

